All right, let's turn to
the second important method for
computing word similarity,
distributional similarity.
Now, thesauri have problems for
computing similarity.
We don't always have a thesaurus for
a particular language, and
even when we do, thesauri have a problem
with recall, so words are missing,
phrases are missing,
connections between senses may be missing.
And in general, thesauri don't work
as well for verbs or adjectives,
which have less structured
hyponymy relations.
So, for all these reasons, we often
use distributional models of meaning,
often called vector-space
models of meaning.
And these tend to give you higher
recall than hand-built thesauri,
although they might have lower precision.
The intuition of these
distributional models of meaning,
comes from early linguistic work.
So, for example, Zellig Harris in 1954,
said oculist and
eye-doctor occur in almost
the same environments.
So, if A and B have almost identical
environments, we say they're synonyms.
And Firth, back in 57 said, you shall
know a word by the company it keeps.
So, here is an example, we have
a bunch of sentences about tesgüino.
Nida says a bottle of
tesgüino is on the table.
Everybody likes tesgüino.
Tesgüino makes you drunk.
We make tesgüino out of corn.
So, from these context words for a human
is very easy to guess that tesguino
means some kind of alcoholic beverage,
some kind of beer made out of corn.
So the intuition for
an algorithm is two words are similar if
they're just surrounded by similar words.
Very simple idea.
Lets see how to make that work.
Remember the term document matrix,
we saw an information retrieval, so
each cell in the term document matrix was
the count of the term t in a document d so
we call it the term frequency of t in d.
And we thought about it, was was meant to
be a document was to be a count vector, so
a column in this term document matrix.
So, the document As You Like It, the
Shakespeare play is a count vector over
lots of words, I show just four
worlds; battle, soldier, fool, clown.
So, As You Like It is a count vector.
So, two documents are similar
if their vectors were similar.
So Julius Caesar, high counts for battle
and soldier, low counts for fool and
clown.
Similarly, Henry V high counts for
battle and soldier, low counts for
fool and clown.
So we saw that Julius Caesar and Henry V,
if they were to query in a document or
two documents, They were similar
by this vector similarity method.
And we're just going to use
the same exact intuition for
deciding if two words are similar.
So, look at the words in a term-document
matrix, and now a word is a count vector,
and two words are similar if
their vectors are similar.
So, fool has high counts
in the document as you
like it in the document Twelfth Night and
low counts in Julius Caesar and Henry V.
Clown has count in As You Like It and
Twelfth Night and
low counts in Julius Caesar and Henry V.
So, we say that fool and
clown are similar.
But probably battle and
fool are not similar,
because battle has high counts here and
low counts here but fool has the opposite.
It has high counts here and
low counts here.
So, the intuition of word similarity,
distributional word similarity,
is instead of using entire documents
like we used for information retrieval,
let's use smaller context.
We could use a paragraph, or we could
use just a window of ten words, and
now we define a word by a vector
over these context counts for
whatever this context is.
So, let's suppose we use context
of ten words to the left and
ten words to the right.
Here's sample example of
graph from the Brown corpus.
So here's some words, t he word apricot,
the word pineapple, the word digital and
the word information.
They've shown you for
each of them just one set of context.
Ten words before apricot,
ten words after apricot for
one of the uses of apricot in
one document in the corpus and
here's 10 words before and
after pineapple and so long.
So from the various documents, examples
I've grabbed from the Brown corpus some
examples for each of these words,
looking like these examples.
I can compute little counts and I can
build myself the term context matrix.
So, here's the term-context matrix for
these four words, apricot, pineapple,
digital, information.
They don't ever appear with the word
aardvark, but the words digital
information have the word computer within
ten words of them twice for digital and
once for information, or the word pinch
occurs with apricot and pineapple,
which sugar occurs with them.
Where as the word data,
and the word result tends to occur with
the word digital and the word information.
Now again,
we say two words are similar in meaning
if their context factors are similar.
So, apricot has a one for
pinch and a one for sugar.
Pineapple also has a one for pinch and
a one for sugar, and zero for
computer and data.
So, that tells us that probably
these words are similar.
Whereas digital and information, their
counts occur in other words like computer,
data, and result, so
they're probably similar as well.
Simple intuition, just like we saw in
information retrieval for comparing
documents, but now we're comparing
words and using a reduced context.
Now for the term-document matrix for
information retrieval we
used tf-idf weighting.
We didn't use raw counts.
We used various kinds of weighting,
sometimes tf, sometimes idf,
sometimes both.
Now for the term context matrix,
it's very common to use a version of
pointwise mutual information called
Positive Pointwise Mutual Information.
So, let's look at that.
Pointwise Mutual Information is
an information theoretic method that says,
do events x and y occur     more
often than if they were independent.
So, the Pointwise Mutual Information
between   two things x and
y is  the probability of the two
occurring together.    , divided by
the probability of the two, the product of
the probability of the two independently,
it would take a lot of that.
So you can see that, if the two things
occur more often than you would expect
by chance, more often than you
would expect by independents,
then the numerator will be much
higher than the denominator.
So, between two words
the Pointwise Mutual Information
is the log of the probability of
the two words occurring together
times the product of the two
words occurring independently.
And positive PMI simply replaces
all the negative values with zero.
So, imagine that we have a matrix F or
term-context matrix,
we'll call it F for frequency and
we've got rows labeled by words and
we have columns labeled by context
which could be a context word.
So we saw, for example, a context word
aardvark, or computer, or data, or
pinch or so on.
And we're going to take our,
here's our counts in each of these,
each of these counts is f sub ij,
the frequency of row i column j.
So, we're going to turn those
into probabilities first.
So, we'll say that the probability of
a word i and j occurring together,
the joint probability of a word i and a
context j is the frequency with which they
appear normalized by the frequency
of all words in all contexts.
We sum over the entire Matrix,
that's the denominator N.
The probability of a word,
that's a row, i star,
is the count of all of the contexts
that word occur in, so
we sum over all possible contexts.
And we sum all the counts for that word
in those contexts, normalized by N.
And the probability of
a context is the sum
over all words that that context occurs
in, those counts again normalized.
And we take these probabilities,
the probability of a word and
a context occurring together times
the probability over probability of
a word times the probability of a context,
we take that log and that's our PMI.
And our positive PMI is if it's less
than 0, we will replace it with 0.
So, let's see how that works in practice.
I made a simpler little matrix of counts
here for working through our example.
So, the word digital occurs in
the context computer twice,
in the context data once, in the context
result once, and never for pinch or sugar.
Okay, we saw before.
And again, our probability of
the joint probability of a word, and
a context is the frequency with which the
word occurs in the context, normalize by
the total N, and the sum for all counts,
for all words and for all contexts.
Let's first compute N.
N is the sum of all these things 2,
3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19 so,
end is 19,
our denominator is going to be 19 for
all of our various probabilities.
So now, the probability,
the joint probability of the word
information in the context data.
So, word is information in the context
data, we've got our f(i) j is 6 and
our n is 19 so
we have six-nineteenths or 0.32.
So, that is the joint probability,
information and data.
Now ,we need to compute
the probability of words and
compute the probability of context.
So, the probability of word
we just sum a row over all
context that that word can occur in.
So, the word information occurs 11 times.
Once in this context, plus six, plus four.
So we have a total of 11 times
over again N of 19, or .58.
So that's the probability of the word.
Then we're going to do the same thing for
context.
We sum over all words that that context
occurs with over those counts and
normalize.
So, for the context data,
we have a 1 plus a 6.
So we have 7/19 or .37.
So if we do this computation for
all of our examples,
we'll get this little matrix.
Here we have the, and
here we have the joint probabilities,
all the joint probabilities.
Here we have the marginal,
the probability of the words and
the probability of the context.
So again, here's our .37 and
that's the probability of data.
And Here's our 0.58,
that's the probability
of the word information.
And there's our 0.32, okay?
So now we're ready to compute PMI.
Recall that PMI is the log based 2
of the joint over the two marginals.
So, that's going to be our .32
divided by our .37 times .58 and
then we'll take the log of that, so
that's .58 or .57 using full precision.
And we can see here,
that if we take this log,
that we get positive numbers for
computer being linked with digital,
and information with data, and
pineapple with sugar, and so on.
And we've replaced any of
the time we got negative numbers,
since this is positive PMI, we've replaced
the negative numbers with the zeroes.
Now the problem with PMI is it's
weighted toward infrequent events and
there is a lovely survey
paper by Turney and
Pantel that walks through some of
the ways that you can alleviate this.
But it turns out that very simple methods
like Laplace Smoothing can actually help.
Let's look at how this
works with Add-2 smoothing.
So here I've just added
two to all the counts, so
we just have simple Add-2 smoothing.
And we computed our probability table,
again with our marginals for
the context and the word.
And now what I'm showing you
here is our positive PMI tables,
here's our original table for
no smoothing.
And here we are with add two smoothing and
then what you'll notice is that in
the original table without smoothing.
The link between apricot and pineapple
in sugar was very high, we get a very
high PMI despite the fact I don't know if
you remember that the counts were just 1.
Whereas data for which we had a lot
more evidence, counts of 6 and 4,
the link between information and
data, or information and
result, had much lower PMI values.
Adding two affects the lower counts
more than the higher counts.
And we can see that the larger counts
haven't changed very much, but
we've discounted those
excessively high PMI values and
now we have much more reasonable,
related numbers for our PMI.
So, that's the first half of our
introduction to distributional similarity,
and we'll turn in the second half
to how to use cosine metrics
to actually compute the similarity.